---
order: 2
---
# Social Media Disclaimer

Social media posts and other public statements by the Nibiru team or social media
accounts are not directed to any investors or potential investors, and do not
constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy any securities
and may not be used or relied upon in evaluating the merits of any investment.
This content and posts are provided for informational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as legal, business, investment, tax or other advice. Under no
circumstances should any posts or other information provided on any post be
construed as an offer soliciting the purchase or sale of any security or interest
in any investment vehicle sponsored, discussed, or mentioned. 

Nibiru, including affiliates and personnel associated with the project, may have
a financial interest in the assets discussed. With regards to Nibiru’s
investments in any cryptocurrency, decentralized autonomous organization (“DAO”),
or token projects, Nibiru is acting in its own financial interest, not
necessarily in the interests of other token holders or DAO members. Other
investors, token holders and DAO members should not expect that Nibiru will
undertake any involvement in these projects other than as an investor and token
holder and should not rely on Nibiru to have any particular involvement.

All information contained in posts should be independently verified and
confirmed. 

Certain statements made may constitute “forward-looking statements.” To the
extent any information herein constitutes forward-looking statements (which can
be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,”
“should,” “expect,” “anticipation,” “upside,” “potential,” “project,” “estimate,”
“intend,” “forecast,” “target” or “believe” or comparable terminology), please
note that, due to various risks and uncertainties, actual events, results, or
performance may differ materially from those reflected or contemplated in such
statements. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees and involve risks,
uncertainties, and assumptions. Nibiru expressly disclaims any obligation to
update any forward-looking statement in the event it later turns out to be
inaccurate — whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.

